Antonio Gutierrez is now speaking live
from Cairo along with the Egyptian
foreign minister let's listen
in for his critical
leadership I am in the Middle East on a
humanitarian Mission at a moment of
profound crisis a crisis unlike any the
region has seen in
decades that crisis was triggered by the
atrous 7 octo Hamas attacks that killed
injured and kidnapped a large number of
civilians from Israel and indeed from
around the
world but this led
Israel to a total Siege on glaza and the
Relentless bombing campaign with an
Ever also journalists workers and many
others including all right that's un
Secretary General Antonio Gutierrez so
the head of the United Nations he's in
Egypt obviously Egypt playing a major
role here since uh Egypt controls the
Rafa border crossing the only door out
of Gaza right now that is not also
controlled uh by the Israelis and uh he
is speaking along with the Egyptian
foreign minister now remember the
context number one is that the UN
Secretary General has called for
ceasefire that's language that is new as
of uh today or the previous day and the
first 10 or 11 days of this crisis the
UN actually hadn't called at the highest
Echelon for a ceasefire but now he is
doing so uh and there are many questions
around how that Aid is going to be
delivered around the volume of the aid
the amount where it's going and how it's
even going to be distributed within the
Gaza Strip given that no fuel is going
to be allowed
in as we keep an eye on that and and we
keep an eye on the Skies over Gaza that
life shot just moments after we saw um
continued bombardments on Gaza City I
want to bring in Sultan Barakat you are
professor of public policy at hammad bin
Khalifa University here in Qatar thank
you for being with
us I want to talk with you a little bit
about what the Arab and Muslim nations
can do at this stage for the
Palestinians I say this because there
were statements coming out of Iran today
saying the Islam world's silence is
completely unjustified this was in a
phone call with uh Qatar um and now you
see the UN Secretary General in Egypt
there's also the King of Jordan who's in
Egypt where does diplomacy diplomacy
stand right now within the Arab world in
support of the Palestinians well the two
world within the Arab world and the
mostl of they the states and the people
on the streets I think the public uh has
made their views very very clear
throughout the W World many seen
protests huge protests demonstrations
and so on but when it comes to the
states uh they have been more reluctant
to make a direct statement against the
situation in Gaza partly because of fear
of the implication that may bring Vis A
V the United States in particular their
relationship with the United States
others have already tied themselves into
processes of normalization with Israel
and or already had peace agreements with
Israel
so for example Jordan Egypt Morocco even
Sudan well Jordan and Egypt that's
Jordan and Egypt that's decades old but
countries the Abraham Accords the UAE
Bahrain Morocco that's that's very
recent do you think that they
normalizing of ties with Israel do you
think that could be that could become
more fragile as this uh conflict
continues it has to it must become more
fragile I mean the the problem now is
that they're still banking on the fact
that there is hope in the process but
their public will be very it will be
very very diff sorry hope in what
process in the normalization that it can
continue as as if it hasn't been
interrupted and so on but I think the
public opinion now is very much against
respectfully and I'm sorry to do this
but let me interrupt you because we now
have the translation for the UN
Secretary General let's listen
to and ra crossing board are the only
Lifeline to those in Gaza
Strip for
Egypt once again proves that it is a a
pillar of peace and Security in the
region it is the only country capable of
diffusing violence the longer the
war the more the violence will
become and consequently the more losses
there will be in human life and property
we are demanding an immediate ceasefire
and the quick and Swift Delivery of
relief Aid I will put this humanitarian
Mission into effect from now and from
Egypt we shouldn't lose sight that we
are all anticipating and looking forward
to a longlasting permanent and final
solution with the establishment of as
dependent Palestinian State side by side
with
Israel
okay we've just been listening to um
Antonio Gutierrez he's calling on Hamas
to release uh hostages he's calling on
Israel to give unrestricted access to
Aid into Gaza uh he is calling for an
immediate humanitarian ceasefire in Gaza
again that's his new position it wasn't
his position for the first 10 days of
the conflict but it is as of I think 48
hours ago uh and he says that Gaza needs
Aid at a scale and on a sustained basis
what do you make of the uh the position
of the UN since the beginning of this
conflict I must say it was slightly it
was disappointing in the sense no one
knows Gaza more than the UN the UN has
been in Gaza for 75 years so they know
exactly the situation he does uh know
very well guus that this is not did not
start on the 7th of October this has a
long history the UN itself has been the
victim of Israeli attacks many many
times over the years so all he does
really he's trying to put it within an
acceptable framework for the super for
the super powers and that's basically
the United States and Britain and France
at the moment so he's trying to walk
tight row between satisfying them and uh
their protection of Israel which he
fully understand that is Israel enjoys
an exceptionalism that no other state
has in the world he has the the longest
history of Engagement as the UN and with
Israelis understand exactly the
qualities Israel enjoys as the spoiled
child of the of the West now within that
he has to come up with statements I
think upgrading to uh a ceasefire is is
a better call than initially
humanitarian corridors but uh ultimately
he'd be lucky if Israel allows in
humanitarian corridors in a systematic
and safe ways how does he have any
leverage over what's about to happen Aid
going in the trucks going in from Egypt
into the Gaza Strip and the conditions
that are put on those trucks how much
Aid what Aid can be in those trucks Etc
does he have not at this stage I mean
the the UN has the infrastructure and
can deliver Aid and can guarantee for
Israel that this Aid will not make it
into the hands of Hamas and will not
include any weapons and this is not the
first time they've done it many many
times before and they've done it all
over the world but at the moment the
cony that we see ready to go into uh uh
into Gaza is a
token a 20 trucks for 2.2 million people
20 trucks for two yes it's it's nothing
it it is not a United Nation Aid this is
mostly from Egypt it's a token to show
Egypt is doing its part it's a token to
show that Biden didn't travel on uh Air
Force One all that distance and back for
nothing so he's done something and it is
also a way to show that the Israeli
still have a space in their heart to to
look after these people but we all know
that the 20 trucks are not sufficient
you know just to supply the hospitals
never mind the ones that were damaged
the one that are still running you need
much more than that on daily basis yeah
you don't need to be an expert to know
that you can't feed 2 million people
with 20 trucks you can't give drinking
water food would have spoiled by now
these have been trucks have been there
for about 10 days so this is for mostly
mostly we probably have medical uh
equipment and hygiene kits to help limit
the spread of diseases this is the the
next thing that is coming to head Gaza
there will be a spread of epidemics
across the the the area largely because
of uh failing of sewer system without
electricity there's no way to pump the
sewers and these will now come to haunt
everyone aside from the fact that there
is no uh fresh water available to the to
the people of GZA Sultan Barakat thank
you very much for joining us this hour
appreciate your context and Analysis